Add standard decorator documentation (#1218)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/docs/v3/components/decorators.md

  v2: components/decorators/
---

Decorators are functions that can be used to declaratively annotate and modify the behavior of classes.

Lit provides a set of decorators that enable declarative APIs for things like registering elements, defining reactive properties and query properties, or adding event options to event handler methods.

For example, the `@customElement` and `@property()` decorators let you register a custom element and define a reactive property in a compact, declarative way:

```ts
@customElement('my-element')
export class MyElement extends LitElement {

  @property() greeting = 'Welcome';

}
```

> 

Reviewer: this segment from below
https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/blob/81fa0a90890409f9b3f208a5827ffe27f9e33669/packages/lit-dev-content/site/docs/v3/components/decorators.md?plain=1#L45-L55

should be moved up here to follow this code snippet

  v2: components/decorators/
---

Decorators are functions that can be used to declaratively annotate and modify the behavior of classes.

> Lit provides a set of decorators that enable declarative APIs for things like registering elements, defining reactive properties and query properties, or adding event options to event handler methods.

Author: I wonder if we should say: 
```suggestion
Lit provides a set of optional decorators that enable declarative APIs for things like registering elements, defining reactive properties and query properties, or adding event options to event handler methods.
```

  v2: components/decorators/
---

Decorators are functions that can be used to declaratively annotate and modify the behavior of classes.

Lit provides a set of optional decorators that enable declarative APIs for things like registering elements, defining reactive properties and query properties, or adding event options to event handler methods.

For example, the `@customElement` and `@property()` decorators let you register a custom element and define a reactive property in a compact, declarative way:

```ts
@customElement('my-element')
export class MyElement extends LitElement {

  @property()
  greeting = 'Welcome';

}
```

{% aside "info" "no-header"%}

Lit supports two different versions of the JavaScript decorators proposal – an early version supported by TypeScript that we refer to as _experimental decorators_ and a new and final version we refer to as _standard decorators_.
 

> There are some small differences in usage between the two proposals (standard decorators sometimes require the `accessor` keyword). Our code samples are written for experimental decorators because we recommend them for production at the moment.

Reviewer: That sounds good to me. That's everything except `customElement` and `eventOptions` for our built-in decorators. Maybe we should put that info somewhere..

> There are some small differences in usage between the two proposals (standard decorators sometimes require the `accessor` keyword). Our code samples are written for experimental decorators because we recommend them for production at the moment.

Reviewer: Or we could just be specific here and say
> standard decorators on class fields require the `accessor` keyword

> There are some small differences in usage between the two proposals (standard decorators sometimes require the `accessor` keyword). Our code samples are written for experimental decorators because we recommend them for production at the moment.

Reviewer: Though we were trying to go for brevity here within the info box since more detail is linked to down below.

For some reason, I like the sound of "often" better than "usually".

  v2: components/decorators/
---

Decorators are functions that can be used to declaratively annotate and modify the behavior of classes.

Lit provides a set of decorators that enable declarative APIs for things like registering elements, defining reactive properties and query properties, or adding event options to event handler methods.

For example, the `@customElement` and `@property()` decorators let you register a custom element and define a reactive property in a compact, declarative way:

```ts
@customElement('my-element')
export class MyElement extends LitElement {

  @property() greeting = 'Welcome';

}
```

Decorators are a [stage 3 proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators) for addition to the ECMAScript standard. Compilers like [Babel](https://babeljs.io/) and [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) support decorators, though no browsers have implemented them yet. Lit decorators work with Babel and TypeScript, and will work in browsers when they implement them natively.

> Previous versions of the decorators proposal are also supported by some compilers, most notably TypeScript's "experimental decorators" which Lit has supported since it's inception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous versions of the decorators proposal are also supported by some compilers, most notably TypeScript's "experimental decorators" which Lit has supported since its inception.
```

Reviewer 2: Done!

> Lit decorators work with both TypeScript experimental decorators and standard decorators. We currently recommend that TypeScript users use experimental decorators because the compiler output is much smaller than for experimental decorators.

Reviewer: I think there's potential for confusion when we say "using" a certain kind of decorator. The users are not choosing the decorator to use, since we only vend a single version of decorators, but rather the mode in which they get compiled.
```suggestion
Lit decorators work as both TypeScript experimental decorators and standard decorators. We currently recommend that TypeScript users use experimental decorator mode because the compiler output is much smaller than in standard decorators mode.
```

Reviewer 2: Done!

customElements.define('my-element', MyElement);
```

The `@property` decorator declares a [reactive property](/docs/v3/components/properties/).

> Other decorators provided by the Lit package can be found in the list of [built-in decorators](#built-in-decorators).

Author: I think we should maybe just move the list of decorators back up here. ie, practical knowledge before theory and configuration.

We should also maybe mention that the decorators are documented along their respective features - or maybe the table does that well enough.

Reviewer: My thinking was the list of decorators was a jarring break between discussion of experimental/standard decorators (what i've labeled as "Background") and the "Enabling decorators" section. If we move the "Background"/"Decorator versions and standards" section to be after the "Using decorators" section, then I can get onboard with that.

Agreed that theory can come later, but I was thinking configuration should precede usage. But perhaps I'm thinking too much as a brand new user who's setting everything up. For new users to an established project, the usage is more important and they wouldn't care about usage.

The biggest concern I have for moving the "Background" to be lower is that I added the sentence stating all of our decorator examples assume the usage of experimental decorators, and wanted to a place to link down to standard decorator info/config/usage down below sooner rather than later.

Author: Could we do a short note about our example code up top that points to the more detailed background section?

> ## Background

Author: I wonder if this is important enough to come before the using sections? Maybe it could go down but have a more descriptive title? Like "Decorators versions and standards"?

{% endaside %}

Previous versions of the decorators proposal are also supported by some compilers, most notably TypeScript's "experimental decorators" which Lit has supported since its inception.

Lit decorators work as both TypeScript experimental decorators _and_ standard decorators meaning they work with either configuration set in tsconfig. However, we currently recommend that TypeScript users use experimental decorator mode, i.e. projects should set `"experimentalDecorators": true`, because the emitted JavaScript is much smaller than in standard decorator mode. As such, all of the TypeScript code samples in our documentation reflect the syntax that works with this mode – namely, we omit the `accessor` keyword on class fields that's required for [standard decorators](#standard-decorators).

If you are working in a TypeScript project that requires `"experimentalDecorators": false` or `useDefineForClassFields: true`, consult the [Migrating TypeScript to standard decorators](#migrating-typescript-standard-decorators) section of this page.

> ## Enabling decorators { #enabling-decorators }

Author: I think we should consider nesting this and *Importing Decorators* under a *Using Decorators* heading

> ## Enabling decorators { #enabling-decorators }

Author: Should we add a sentence here that decorators current require a compiler?

customElements.define('my-element', MyElement);
```

> The `@property` decorator declares a [reactive property](/docs/v3/components/properties/).

Author: I think we could tighten up the explanation visually by not using a code block:

```suggestion
The `@customElement` decorator defines a custom element, equivalent to calling `customElements.define('my-element', MyElement)`, while the `@property` decorator declares a [reactive property](/docs/v3/components/properties/).
```

Reviewer: Actually not a fan of how this is looking. It's basically the same as the sentence above the sample code, and the `customElements.define` line doesn't look great without syntax highlighting.

<img width="826" alt="image" src="https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/assets/40413829/162ed052-051b-45af-9ee6-377f6f1b21b6">

Author: Ah, thanks for posting the image. I think this makes it clear that the explanatory text after the sample isn't necessary. We can just link "define a reactive property" and "register a custom element" to the right docs pages. Brevity for the win.

Reviewer: Good point. The list of built-in has a short link that points up to this sample but it would then make more sense for it to point to http://lit.dev/docs/components/defining/

Author: yeah, that's the right page

{% aside "info" %}

Decorator versions and syntax.

> Lit decorators support multiple versions of the decorator specification – TypeScript experimental decorators and standard decorators – but to be used as standard decorators require a newer syntax of using the `accessor` keyword on decorated properties.
> 
> We recommend that TypeScript users stick with experimental decorators for the moment, and as such, all of our TS code samples contain syntax that work in that mode, _without_ the `accessor` keyword.
> 
> If you are using Babel to compile decorators, or are required to use `"experimentalDecorators": false` in your TypeScript config, you will need to add those. See [Standard decorators](#standard-decorators) for more information.

Author: I think this is a bit long for a note. I would mostly just direct the reader to the **Decorator versions** section:

```suggestion
Lit supports two different versions of the JavaScript decorators proposal – an early version supported by TypeScript that we refer to as _experimental decorators_ and a new and final version we refer to as _standard decorators_.
 
There are some small differences in usage between the two proposals (standard decorators sometimes require the `accessor` keyword). We use the experimental decorators conventions in our code samples because we recommend experimental decorators for production at the moment.
 
 See [Decorator versions](#decorator-versions) for more details.
```

Reviewer: Nice! I definitely felt like this was long but wasn't sure how to make it more concise.

Reviewer: The second paragraph with 3 line beginnings starting with "decorators" and line endings with "experimental" is awkward. 😂 

<img width="781" alt="image" src="https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/assets/40413829/4c7c02bf-2389-4893-857d-212428edfcbb">

Author: yeah. Let's see...

```suggestion
Lit supports two different versions of the JavaScript decorators proposal – an early version supported by TypeScript that we refer to as _experimental decorators_ and a new and final version we refer to as _standard decorators_.
 
There are some small differences in usage between the two proposals (standard decorators sometimes require the `accessor` keyword). Our code samples use experimental decorators because we recommend them for production at the moment.
 
See [Decorator versions](#decorator-versions) for more details.
```

Reviewer: Looking better..
<img width="800" alt="image" src="https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/assets/40413829/af655b75-5dee-4b49-929b-26e10947a71e">

How about instead of "Our code samples use experimental decorators", "Our code samples are written to work with experimental decorators", or "Our code samples are written for experimental decorators" ? It's a subtle difference but I don't think "use" is right because they're all "using" the same hybrid decorators.

Author: I originally had "use experimental decorators conventions" but I dropped "conventions" so that "them" would refer to the decorators, not the convention. Your wording works though!

{% endaside %}

Previous versions of the decorators proposal are also supported by some compilers, most notably TypeScript's "experimental decorators" which Lit has supported since its inception.

Lit decorators work as both TypeScript experimental decorators and standard decorators. We currently recommend that TypeScript users use experimental decorator mode because the JavaScript output is much smaller than in standard decorator mode.

> This means that TypeScript-based Lit projects should have `"experimentalDecorators": true` in their tsconfig.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that TypeScript-based Lit projects should have `"experimentalDecorators": true` in their tsconfig. As such, all of the TypeScript code samples in our documentation reflect the syntax that works with this mode. If you are working in a project that requires `"experimentalDecorators": false` and or `useDefineForClassFields: false`, consult the [standard decorators](#standard-decorators) section of this page.
```

> See the [Enabling decorators](#enabling-decorators) section for more information.

Reviewer: If we move the `{#custom-element}` description up, and move the `## Standard decorators` section to the bottom, this line can be omitted.

  }
}
```

Note: The `accessor` keyword was introduced in TypeScript 4.9 and full standard decorator with metadata support requires TypeScript 5.2 or greater.

### Using decorators with Babel { #decorators-babel }

[Babel](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/) supports standard decorators with the [`@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators`](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-plugin-proposal-decorators) plugin as of version 7.23. Babel does not support TypeScript experimental decorators, so you must use Lit decorators with [standard decorator syntax](#standard-decorators) using the `accessor` keyword on decorated class fields.

Enable decorators by adding [`@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators`](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-plugin-proposal-decorators) with these Babel configuration settings:

```json
// babel.config.json
{
  "plugins": [
    ["@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators", {"version": "2023-05"}]
  ]
}
```

Note: Lit decorators only work with `"version": "2023-05"`. Other versions, including the formerly supported `"2018-09"`, are not supported.

### Avoiding issues with class fields and decorators {#avoiding-issues-with-class-fields}

> Standard [class fields](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/Public_class_fields) have a problematic interaction with declaring reactive properties. See [Avoiding issues with class fields when declaring properties](/docs/v3/components/properties/#avoiding-issues-with-class-fields) for more information.

Reviewer 3: That linked document doesn't mention the `accessor` keyword, which is our work around here.

I think this section is confusing here as written. Maybe we should just drop it, since its content is covered already?

Reviewer: there's an issue for that here https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/issues/1243 which can be a follow up

Standard decorators are supported in TypeScript and Babel, with native browser coming in the near future.

The biggest difference between using standard decorators and experimental decorators is that, for performance reasons, standard decorators cannot change the _kind_ of a class member – fields, accessors, and methods – being decorated and replaced, and will only produce the same kind of member.

Since many Lit decorators generate accessors, this means that the decorators need to be applied to accessors, not class fields.

To make this convenient, the standard decorator specification adds the `accessor` keyword to declare "auto-accessors":

```ts
class MyClass {
  accessor foo = 42;
}
```

Auto-accessors create a getter and setter pair that read and write from a private field. Decorators can then wrap these getters and setters.

Lit decorators that work on class fields with experimental decorators - such as `@property()`, `@state()`, `@query()`, etc. - must be applied to accessors or auto-accessors with standard decorators:

```ts
@customElement('my-element')
export class MyElement extends LitElement {

  @property() accessor greeting = 'Welcome';

}
```

> ### Compiler output considerations

Author: Maybe this belongs with the *Enabling* section?

import {eventOptions} from 'lit/decorators/event-options.js';
```

> ## Standard decorators { #standard-decorators }

Reviewer: I'm leaning we should move this entire `## Standard decorators` section to be all the way at the bottom, after the `## Enabling decorators`. This is introducing new `accessor` syntax that we currently do not recommend, nor use anywhere in our code samples.

I think it should serve more as an FYI, and look if you only need to kind of section, hence at the bottom.

When we mention standard decorators during the "Enabling" portion, eg. at TS migration, and usage with Babel, we can link to it.

> "Standard decorators" is the version of decorators that has reached Stage 3 consensus at TC39, the body that defines ECMAScript/JavaScript. The decorators specification has been fine-tuned with active VM implementor feedback to be as optimizable as possible.

Reviewer 2: Is "active VM implementor feedback" too much detail?

Reviewer: The whole sentence could also be dropped. If anything, we might want to say more like "At this stage, all semantics, syntax and API are completely described with no change expected barring critical findings from implementors."

Reviewer 2: Good call. Changed to that

Reviewer 2: Removed this since we repeat Stage 3 multiple times through the document.

> Standard decorators are supported in TypeScript and Babel, with native browser coming in the near future.

Reviewer 2: Maybe less specific: "in the near future" -> "in the future".

Reviewer: Near is vague enough, and I kind of like that this is optimistic! This sentence is more accurate now than it was 2 weeks ago, and will become more correct as time goes haha.

Reviewer 2: haha! Agree!

> 

Author: ^ "In the future when decorators are supported natively in browsers, this will no longer be necessary."

### Using decorators with TypeScript { #decorators-typescript }

> TypeScript supports both experimental decorators and standard decorators. We recommend that TypeScript developers use experimental decorators for now for optimal compiler output.

Author: Should this link to the considerations section?

To use experimental decorators you must enable the `experimentalDecorators` compiler option.

You should also ensure that the `useDefineForClassFields` setting is `false`. Note, this is only be required when the `target` is set to `ES2022` or greater, but it is recommended to explicitly set this to `false`.

```json
// tsconfig.json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "experimentalDecorators": true,
    "useDefineForClassFields": false
  }
}
```

Enabling `emitDecoratorMetadata` is not required and not recommended.

#### Migrating TypeScript experimental decorators to standard decorators { #migrating-typescript-standard-decorators }

Lit decorators have been designed to support standard decorator syntax (using `accessor` on class field decorators) with TypeScript's experimental decorator mode.

This allows incremental migration off of experimental decorators by adding the `accessor` keyword to decorated properties without a change of behavior. Once all class field decorators use the `accessor` keyword, you can change your `tsconfig.json` completing the migration to standard decorators:

```json
// tsconfig.json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "experimentalDecorators": false,

>     "useDefineForClassFields": true

Author: These are the default values, so I don't know if we need to show them.

Reviewer: tsconfig stuff is kinda iffy because the default is different depending on other configs or TS version so I don't think it's bad to show them to be explicit but we could add `//` comment notation stating it could be omitted with certain TS versions.

Reviewer 2: I like the comment approach.

When using decorators, transpiler settings for Babel and TypeScript must be configured correctly as shown in the sections above for [TypeScript](#decorators-typescript) and [Babel](#decorators-babel).

## Decorator versions

Decorators are a [stage 3 proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators) for addition to the ECMAScript standard. Compilers like [Babel](https://babeljs.io/) and [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) support decorators, though no browsers have implemented them yet. Lit decorators work with Babel and TypeScript, and will work in browsers when they implement them natively.

{% aside "info" %}

What does stage 3 mean?

It means that the specification text is complete, and ready for browsers to implement. Once the specification has been implemented in multiple browsers, it can move to the final stage, stage 4, and be added to the ECMAScript standard. A stage 3 proposal will only change if critical issues are discovered during implementation.

{% endaside %}

> ### Earlier decorators

Author: ```suggestion
### Earlier decorators proposals
```

Standard decorators are supported in TypeScript and Babel, with native browser coming in the near future.

The biggest difference between standard decorators and earlier versions of the decorators is that, for performance reasons, standard decorators cannot change the _kind_ of a class member – fields, accessors, and methods – being decorated and replaced, and will only produce the same kind of member.

Since many Lit decorators generate accessors, this means that the decorators need to be applied to accessors, not class fields.

To make this convenient, the standard decorator specification adds the `accessor` keyword to declare "auto-accessors":

```ts
class MyClass {
  accessor foo = 42;
}
```

Auto-accessors create a getter and setter pair that read and write from a private field. Decorators can then wrap these getters and setters.

Lit decorators that work on class fields with experimental decorators - such as `@property()`, `@state()`, `@query()`, etc. - must be applied to accessors or auto-accessors with standard decorators:

```ts
@customElement('my-element')
export class MyElement extends LitElement {

  @property()
  accessor greeting = 'Welcome';

}
```

> #### Compiler output considerations

Author: I think this can still be a level-3 heading so it's a sibling to early and standard decorator sections, since it talks about both

Reviewer: I was actually thinking if we might remove this all together and just add a link to the reactive properties doc's https://lit.dev/docs/components/properties/#avoiding-issues-with-class-fields next to where we talk about `useDefineForClassFields: false` for TS.

Babel decorators no longer have this issue because they _have_ to use `accessor` now.

We'd have to remove the circular link back to this section from the properties doc if we remove this.

Reviewer: ohhh i was totally answer based on the diff. you meant the compiler output considerations. for that i agree.

> ### Using decorators with TypeScript { #decorators-typescript }

Reviewer: I think it's good we start off with our recommendation of using experimental decorator mode for TS, but would it be worthwhile to add a note, maybe at the bottom of this section, with regards to how to make alternative TS configs work?

Maybe inside a aside with warning, that to use standard decorator mode despite it's large emit, you must add `accessor` keyword on decorated class fields.

Also, if users for some reason _have_ to use `useDefineForClassFields: true`, they can do so either with or without `experimentalDecorators: true` by creating auto-accessors. Maybe this info belongs more in the "Avoiding issues with class fields" section.

Reviewer 2: This is a great comment! Thank you. Regarding your comment about `useDefineForClassFields`, it prompted https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/issues/1243 which will be handled separately.

This did make me notice that no where on Lit.dev do we explicitly state our _hybrid decorator_ strategy. Not even in the upgrade guide. I've added a new incremental migration section to this PR that describes the hybrid decorator strategy.

I've added a section about

> TypeScript supports both experimental decorators and standard decorators. Standard decorators are enabled by default in TypeScript 5.0 and later, though Lit requires decorator metadata, which is available TypeScript 5.2 and later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript supports both experimental decorators and standard decorators. Standard decorators are enabled by default in TypeScript 5.0 and later, though Lit requires decorator metadata, which is available in TypeScript 5.2 and later.
```

Reviewer 2: Done!

We recommend that TypeScript developers use experimental decorators for now for optimal compiler output.

To use experimental decorators you must enable the `experimentalDecorators` compiler option.

> You should also ensure that the `useDefineForClassFields` setting is `false`. Note, this should only be required when the `target` is set to `esnext` or greater, but it's recommended to explicitly ensure this setting is `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should also ensure that the `useDefineForClassFields` setting is `false`. Note, this should only be required when the `target` is set to `ES2022` or greater, but it's recommended to explicitly ensure this setting is `false`.
```

Reviewer 2: Done!

Enabling `emitDecoratorMetadata` is not required and not recommended.

### Using decorators with Babel { #decorators-babel }

> [Babel](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/) supports standard decorators with the [`@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators`](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-plugin-proposal-decorators) plugin. Babel does not support TypeScript experimental decorators, so you must use Lit decorators in standard decorator mode with the `accessor` keyword on decorated class fields.

Reviewer: Link back to standard decorators section?
```suggestion
[Babel](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/) supports standard decorators with the [`@babel/plugin-proposal-decorators`](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-plugin-proposal-decorators) plugin. Babel does not support TypeScript experimental decorators, so you must use Lit decorators in [standard decorator mode with the `accessor` keyword](#standard-decorators) on decorated class fields.
```

Reviewer 2: Done!

Enabling `emitDecoratorMetadata` is not required and not recommended.

> #### Migrating TypeScript experimental decorators to standard decorators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Migrating TypeScript experimental decorators to standard decorators { #migrating-typescript-standard-decorators }
```

> Lit decorators have been designed to support standard decorator syntax (using

Reviewer: If "Standard decorators" section is moved to the bottom
```suggestion
Lit decorators have been designed to support [standard decorator](#standard-decorators) syntax (using
```

`accessor` on class field decorators) with TypeScript's experimental decorator
mode.

> This allows incremental migration off experimental decorators by incrementally
> adding the `accessor` keyword without a change of behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows incremental migration off of experimental decorators by
adding the `accessor` keyword to decorated properties without a change of behavior.
```

### Avoiding issues with class fields and decorators {#avoiding-issues-with-class-fields}

> Standard [Class fields](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/Public_class_fields) have a problematic interaction with declaring reactive properties. See [Avoiding issues with class fields when declaring properties](/docs/v3/components/properties/#avoiding-issues-with-class-fields) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standard [class fields](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/Public_class_fields) have a problematic interaction with declaring reactive properties. See [Avoiding issues with class fields when declaring properties](/docs/v3/components/properties/#avoiding-issues-with-class-fields) for more information.
```

Reviewer 2: applied
